---
title: "Methodology: Dataset "
short_title: "Dataset"
parent: /methodology/
suborder: 2
---
# Dataset

The original full dataset contains 20 148 of posts collected from Twitter and Gab, with the original rationale that these platforms are frequently subject to hate speech analysis. This is a practicable choice by the authors but it may have been interesting to study other platforms in order to understand how hate speech manifests in different, more mainstream, contexts.

It was then annotated through gig workers with Amazon Mechanical Turk, which the paper claims were instructed as following:

“We prepare instructions for workers that clearly explain the goal of the annotation task, how to annotate spans and also include a definition for each category. We provided multiple examples with classification, target community and span annotations to help the annotators understand the task.”

However, quite crucially, the paper does not provide the specific instructions or examples given to the annotators, which would have been instrumental in assessing how they defined hate speech and how they shaped the opinion of annotators on the same.

## Data collection

As ca. 20 000 entries are too many to manually analyse, a subset of 500 posts was chosen through pseudo-random number generation. The analysis focuses specifically on the classification and the target community properties and not the rationales  - while they were important in terms of the innovation of this dataset, this project takes an approach more focused on what hate speech is and what the effects of this definition may be in the context of AI detection of hate speech. Furthermore, capacity constrained us from analysing the rationales, which would have been a lot more text-and time-intensive and therefore prohibitive to choosing a sufficiently large subset of the dataset for the analysis to be meaningful.

As there were roughly similar proportions of Twitter posts (9027 posts / 44.9%) and Gab posts (11093 posts / 55.1%) in the original dataset, this was not accounted for, which left us with PROPORTIONS IN OUR TARGET DATASET. For our purposes, the data was exported from GitHub and converted to a .csv file, with columns for:

"annotator1_classification", "annotator1_targetgroup", "annotator2_classification", "annotator2_targetgroup", "annotator3_classification", "annotator3_targetgroup"

An additional variable was added to differentiate between the two origin platforms Twitter and Gab and facilitate respective analysis.

## Limitations - moderation
As the dataset is made up of posts scraped from X/Twitter and Gab, these platforms’ moderation approaches are a relevant factor in shaping the initial dataset, even before annotation. Only posts that the platforms’ moderation mechanisms at the time (2021) would not have already filtered out due to being unlawful or explicit would be part of the dataset in the first place. Therefore, we briefly consider both platform’s moderation approaches in the following:

### Twitter 

In 2022, Elon Musk purchased X and claimed that hate speech on the platform declined following his purchase. However, research conducted in November 2022 discovered that hate speech "spiked" following Musk's acquisition of the company (Benton et al 2022). A later study discovered that the quantity of "likes" on hate posts doubled, suggesting a concerning rise in user engagement with hateful content (Hickey et al., 2025). However, the study also found that although there was an initial spike in hateful content, it decreased significantly and has since fallen to levels below those observed before Musk’s acquisition as of May 2023 (ibid). This is a likely consequence of Musk’s more nuanced approach to hatred and violent speech on X. 

According to X, the platform’s purpose is to serve the public conversation. Therefore, X established rules that ensure users can freely and safely establish their views. These rules include: the ban of promoting or affiliating with the activities of violent and hateful entities, targeted harassment, attacking people based on race, ethnicity, national origin, caste, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, religious affiliation, age, disability, or serious disease. X stipulates that it removes accounts of perpetrators of terrorism, violent extremists, and posts disseminating manifestos. When making enforcements and deleting as well as suspending certain accounts, X highlights that context matters and many factors need to be considered, including but not limited to whether: 
- the behaviour is directed at an individual, group, or protected category of people;
- the report has been filed by the target of the abuse or a bystander;
- the user has a history of violating our policies;
- the severity of the violation;
- the content may be a topic of legitimate public interest.

However, a recently submitted study questions X’s commitment to hate speech enforcement (Tonneau et al. 2026). After manually annotating 540,000 tweets, they find, strikingly, that hateful tweets are not significantly more likely to be removed than non-hateful tweets after 5 months. Comparing hate speech with other harmful content, it becomes clear that the moderation apparatus is functional in removing scam content 39% more accurately and adult content 27% more accurately, but that hate speech is deliberately or structurally deprioritised (ibid). Furthermore, ​violent hate speech did not receive lower engagement than comparable non-hateful content, providing no evidence that X actually shadow-bans harmful content. This is exacerbated by the fact that high-engagement hate speech is less likely to be removed altogether. 

### Gab

Gab’s tagline “Speak Freely” adequately sums up the primary goal of the social media platform. A self-proclaimed social media network built for “Western civilization” that blocks all IPs from the Global South, it is often presented as an alternate space for users who were banned on other social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter. The promise for total free speech protection under the First-Amendement. The platform attracted significant attention after the shooting at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh in October 2018, after evidence emerged that the shooter had documented his anti-semitic agenda on his Gab attack. Gab was also listed as one of the platforms used to coordinate the attack on the US Capitol in January, 2021. 
Gab, owing to its position as a free speech platform, follows the legal standards defined by the US Supreme Court and the First Amendment. The platform’s official stance is that its content declared “illegal” under US law will be moderated or removed with penalties ranging from warnings, suspension to bans. The categories of content Gab explicitly identifies as warranting moderation are direct threats, pornography, doxxing, “fedposting” (a term it uses for violent posts/threats), site abuse, spam and other illegal posts. The defining feature of this policy is that the threshold for platform action is legality, not harm. Speech that is hateful, offensive or degrading to particular groups but is not considered illegal under US law is outside Gab’s scope of moderation and is left to individual users to manage through personal filtering.

## Citations

Benton, B., Choi, J. and Luo, Y. and Green, K. (2022) 'Hate speech spikes on Twitter after Elon Musk acquires the platform', College of Communication and Media Scholarship and Creative Works. Montclair State University. 33. Available at: https://digitalcommons.montclair.edu/scom-facpubs/33

Hickey, D., Fessler, D.M.T., Lerman, K. and Burghardt, K. (2025) 'X under Musk's leadership: Substantial hate and no reduction in inauthentic activity', PLOS ONE. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0313293.

Tonneau, M., Thurgood, D., Liu, D., Malhotra, N., Orozco-Olvera, V., Schroeder, R., Hale, S.A., Horta Ribeiro, M., Rottger, P. and Fraiberger, S.P. (2026) 'The enforcement and feasibility of hate speech moderation on Twitter', arXiv preprint, arXiv:2604.12289v1 [cs.CY], 14 April. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.12289.


{% include chapter-nav.html %}
